Ok...

13:12 15/3/04
So Hegel says about basic ordinary Knowing that..

So I lost it. Not enough of a frame for me, but nonetheless, lets not get to pessimistic. If we take into account pursuit of Hegel's philosophy to resolve everything to its end, how come it's still able to posses structure instead of crumbling into itself. I think one must attribute this to the gaps; so this leads us to the foreground/background / chicken or the egg problem; what is more important/what was first: the philosophy/structure/wiesenshaft or the gaps/the incomprehensible.
As interesting and absolute as this problem seems it may be of little importance in itself unless we can render it to something a bit more 'earthly'; for instance: How does it relate to morals/primordial good/evil/... more specifically: can something already go wrong in this domain (rephrase)?
But to return to the notion of crumbling before. When does the philosophy/wiesenshaft begin to crumble into itself; and when it is standing, does it not all the time 'contain' this crumbling(or at least the notion) in itself. Isn't the concept of Now nothing but this crumbling into itself? So the question is how does it manage to remain, the-spite the crumbling which seems to be the essence of it? Well, it must be this unconectable gap between "now" and the last/next "now"; because although they are the same nows, and they stand one by the other, they just cannot be connected/merged/ or a little shifted, because of the notion of greater Now they impose. This notion of Now takes one of them and makes it a subject while other remains the object, and so although they remain the same, the multitude of them makes them different, and thus multiple; and we are back at the chicken and the egg problem. So we get this structure, but without the zero point, without the anchor. It's like if 2D fractals actually have somewhere between 1 and 2 dimensions and if Thought has only one dimension (that of cause and effect), then this structure lives somewhere between 0 and 1 dimension (effect effecting the cause). 
So with this established lets look at how it renders itself in physics. There we get instead of one, two ends of the thread. One micro and other macroscopic: neutrinos and galaxies.. So far, if we look at the material world as less pure then the ideological, it makes some sense to have more ends. It also makes sense that the closer we get to the end the purer and at the same time more contradictory the forms get. But the question that poses itself here is: Is there the gap (this is different gap than one between nows) between the end and the forms or do the forms gradually morph into the void? And in the case of the physics will the knowledge (if it is obtainable at the first place) about one end imply the other; and since the is a 'lesser' world, will it tell us anything about the (non)existence of the primordial gap in the philosophical domain.
Of course the last question smells, but lets examine the different possible answers that Physics as such is capable of giving us: Discrete vs continuous basis, Singular vs multiple universes, Infinite vs finite universe, Lack of time vs lack of space at the big bang... So it gets clear pretty quickly that physical explanations of world at its ends automatically includes the ideological.
But nonetheless (or because of it), the big question for/on both sides is the existence of the zero point and its relation to the void/non-existence. Is zero point same as void? But how can a point be a void at the same time? Isn't void the opposite of point, no matter from how far we look? If there is no zero point, then why does it seem like everything is pointing toward it?
To get a bit more metaphysical; Isn't the first and the only thing such entity as zero point can "do", to destroy itself by splitting into two parts, which of course cannot anymore be zero points, but one "positive" and other "negative" part of it. But since this jump looks like a necessity isn't it still in a way the zero point. I would say no, because it already incorporates something like a "decision": Which part becomes positive and which negative. This might seem like just a problem of naming things, but from where do we then get this notion of positive/negative. If it is from some later "event" down the line, how was than this primordial jump even possible.. But nonetheless maybe we are moving too fast here, specifically: Even though the primordial entity splits itself into two parts, and by definition this parts cannot be equal, because that would mean the entity multiplied itself, which would be impossible at this stage (because of lack of space for two of them:) and thus it can only split itself into two opposing entities, the "sum" of which is same as that of the entity itself; Nonetheless does the notion that they are opposing already imply that one of them specifically is positive? Maybe, but it certainly dozen't imply which, because they are also the same. Of course here we are already not only in domain of quarks, but also in part that of electrons. Although an electron cannot freely change in a proton; nonetheless the electrons themselves are indistinguishable among themselves - one is totally the same as the other - what keeps them in "order" is law of conservation. But again we are moving to fast here. 
We should examine the nature of the two Opposites some more. Precisely their being of the same matter, same ancestor, same cause, conceived at the same moment and still being different, maybe more accurate; being opposite. The question is from where does this concept of opposition stem. Is it already inherent in the Entity itself, or does it somehow emerge by itself from the impossibility of the Entity to "do" anything? Isn't thus the Opposition in opposition to the Entity(in itself/from itself)? The moment it emerges is itself in opposition to the Entity, but since this would mean the surplus, the original Entity must at the same time vanish, thus leaving the Opposition by itself -> what renders the two opposites, but also the opposition in the situation itself (namely parts being the same, but opposite at the same time), which is the real surplus we get from this split/jump. 
A quick and jumpy conclusion from this would be that, thus the wheels are set in motion from the start and the Jump is in it's nature an discrete event and thus the singularity unattainable by gradual deduction. And that the most primordial thing/idea that is accessible to us is that of opposition. And that it would actually enable us to grasp the singularity in it entirety if it wasn't for the opposition that it poses to itself by making the same at same time opposite. This surplus sets the wheel in motion, which makes it impossible to observe the singularity, also because we need the surplus at the first place to observe. -> This of course nicely parallels itself to nirvana experience, in which we have to lose more and more "stuff" until at the end we also have to let go of the observer/observer.

=========
15:50 15/3/04

Good and Evil as primordial opposites..

So the question that poses itself here is: What is the connection between good and evil and this two primordial opposites (and their surplus)?
In a way good and evil are the highest abstractions for the humans. We use them to substitute for us what is most important to us, although we always have trouble trying to label "stuff" with one or the other. We are also frequently questioning is it at all possible to bucket stuff this way; nonetheless the notion of Good and Evil is as present as ever. 
So to tackle it systematically, we have basically two possibilities: Are the two Opposites themselves good, because they themselves together alone are the Entity, and the surplus that stems from them evil? (Buddha) Or the other way around? (Judo/Christian - glorification of falling into)
Let's say that we identified the anchor of two different (opposite?) mortalities. How do we then get from this anchor to the other less general rules of morality (10 commandment, Buddhist basic morality,...), which are if we look at the world actually more general and present throughout cultures. Namely: Don't: kill, steal, be greedy, (angry, delusional), lie, slander.. One explanation would be that these rules are helping in maintaining larger societies and thus help in propagating themselves. So they are but the stage for the deepest morality which is one of the primordial ones, namely Buddhas: Don't conduct in sexual misconduct (excessive passion) vs Biblical Thou shalt not commit adultery and Thou shalt have no other gods which of course also serve the cause of propagating and same is with Buddha.
So by accepting this explanation we basically diminish those laws to the simple universal state laws, but at the same time we see between their lines their true meaning, namely taking sides in one of the primordial opposites. Two things of interest arise from here. First is if the majority of morality is strictly utilitarian in sens of trying to propagate itself, how would morality look in a world where opposite actions are necessary for a morality to propagate itself; namely: killing, stealing, lying.. of course inside of community itself. But this is definitely not as interesting problem as next one: __________
Let's take a little detour here and return to the Primordial Entity and its representation in Khmer/Hinduistic temples. It's beautifully represented in the biggest of them Angkor Wat, which represents the complete Hinduistic cosmos in small: Angkor Wat; All the elements of the temple point at the center and what actually is there is a deep hole, namely nothing. In the contrast to to Solomons temple, in center, the Inner House, there was the ark with ten commandments, which were given by God to Moses on Mount Sinai: in our terms the excess. Also worth of notion is the most predominant motive of the temples - The Churning of the Ocean of Milk - that is comes from hinduistic creation myth that talks about the game of thug of war between divinities and demons.
__________
But more interestingly, last distinction between essential/primordial part of morality and its utilitarian/reproductional gives us a chance to parallel (them) the two moralities to the two oppositions and their excess. This is getting a little confusing. Again: We have two opposing primordial moralities, and they form the excess which manifests itself in common moralities, which the two share. So if we look from judochristian perspective to this structure, we favor falling in/sticking with them/embracing them, and from Buddhist perspective we try to "acquire dispassion for them". So from both perspectives, (common) moralities stand for a kind of a ladder, the only question is which direction is up, where should we climb? So are we to put them on the altar, embrace them fully again and again, let them shape our existence and follow where it leads us (thus basically abandoning their original context), or should we grow more and more dispassion for them, not abandoning them, but paving our path with them, thus giving less and less thought to them as we move forward with their help?   

Conclusion from above could be: Although the utilitarian moralities might seem like lesser ones comparing to the primordial, they are still moralities and thus in a way indivisible from each other. Although the judo and Buddha moralities are basically leading in opposite ways, it would be hard for one to label another as evil, since evil is supposed to be what lies outside moralities and both share commons which are indivisible from primordial part according to moralities. 
But if we assume both of them to be focused on their path, we can't but notice the very different perspective that is unfolding in front of them. To the Buddhist one, as it is moving along the road paved from basic moralities, the picture of primordial split is becoming ever clearer. And not until one can fully accept this split can one reach nirvana and thus basically abandon the road that let him achieve it. There is of course little need for god in this perspective.
The judochristian perspective, at the other hand, is facing endless road ahead, disappearing in haze. The possibilities for her are endless. Of course from this open position then stem endless controversies such as determinism/free will and god..  
--------------------
18:45 15/3/04
A little appendix to the section:
BUDA: More we move this way, less lies outside morality -> we get enclosed by morality itself, but still, to reach singularity we have to cut off the excess, thus staying only with Buddha and Juda, which by this cut become the same. So the perspective before the cut would be very clear view of double opposite moralities.
JUDA: The other way that has no end (it is bodhisattvan by it's nature), it is surrounded by less and less morality, basically soaked in particularities, thus in a way penetrating deeper and deeper into god (void) (party getting out of hand)
Morality is in a way the last thing (frontier) that is of us, what is truly godly is outside morality, the void, the incomprehensible (the Random/ Mr Random). In other way, closing in to nirvana, god, Random, the incomprehensible is of less and less importance.
Thus the evil perceived as "stuff" outside moralities holds in the middle, but further up or down we go, we need a different approach to classification, (just) because of practicality.. In case of Buda side, Juda as evil would make sense, of course up until nirvana (still not answer to what can go wrong in nirvana domain) In case of Juda, almost fully emerged in god..., probably not not embracing more could be sign of evil (but that could also hold for Buda) But better question would be what is good? In a way notion disappears and we HAVE to trust god.
=====================
Is the third way the paganism - standing still on the leather? And what does islam say (folowing rituals)?
=====================
20:45 15/3/04
How to explain, by acquired means, the Tibetan position to the question of unnecessarity of morality to reach nirvana, that something can go terribly wrong in nirvana domain itself?
The way to start tackling the problem probably lies in the substitution of words by Zizek, from evil to 'terribly wrong'. It signifies the shift from our "earthly" moralities to some higher, but still maintaining the negative signifier. So instead of asking what could go wrong with nirvana domain, let's ask instead what does it mean for something to go wrong there, or rather what can even go wrong there, or even what can "go on" there? Isn't nirvana suppose to imply stasis?
First paradox here arises, that Zizek is trying to tackle a problem proposed by Tibetan tradition, within a scope of Theravada tradition. Particularly he is suggesting a problem in nirvana domain, but transplanted from a tradition with a different view of nirvana itself. Namely don't Tibetan Buddhist count the Bodhisattvas to be operating in nirvana domain itself. This domain seems different from Theravadean domain of nirvana which although after obtaining it you stay here and nothing changes is in a way purer shift than obtaining it and than returning. Theravadean nirvana thus doesn't leave you an option of getting back, precisely because you didn't went anywhere, where at the other hand one could imagine an Bodhisattva having an possibility of turning back and becoming "evil".
---------
correction:
At microscopic/macroscopic scale I forgot to mention of course big bang and big collapse, which are periodical couse and effectin hindu univers. And also beatiful way one can represent them with the ways of the sky: N makro, S micro, E big bang, W big colapse.
=================================
Return to the Primordial Opposites
But of course the question arises: What comes next? Probably: zavest, samozavedanje, um, duh, religija, [absolutno vadenje]?
So is there a middle road between Juda and Buda?
So acording to Hegel if we go one level higher from the two religions we come to 'absolutno vedenje'




